
=head1 NAME

Authen::SASL - SASL Authentication base class

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 use Authen::SASL;

 $sasl = Authen::SASL->new('CRAM-MD5', password => $pass);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SASL is a generic mechanism for authentication used by several
network protocols. B<Authen::SASL> provides an implementation
that all protocols should be able to share.

There are many different encryption methods that can be used
with SASL. These are implemented as sub-classes of B<Authen::SASL>.
For example the package that implements the CRAM-MD5 SASL is
called Authen::SASL::CRAM_MD5. Note that the - is eplaced with an
_. Authen::SASL::CRAM_MD5 also inherits from B<Authen::SASL>.
This means that the following two statements give identical results

  $sasl = Authen::SASL->new('CRAM-MD5', password => $pass);

  $sasl = Authen::SASL::CRAM_MD5->new(password => $pass);

the difference being that the frst one will load the Authen::SASL::CRAM_MD5
package for you when this code is run for the first time. If you use the
second method then you must require the package yourself.

=head1 METHODS

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Authen::SASL::CRAM_MD5>

=head1 AUTHOR

Graham Barr <gbarr@pobox.com>

Please report any bugs, or post any suggestions, to the perl-ldap mailing list
<perl-ldap-dev@lists.sourceforge.net>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1998-2000 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program is
free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same
terms as Perl itself.

=for html <hr>

I<$Id: SASL.pod,v 1.3 2001/08/24 19:31:14 gbarr Exp $>

=cut

