=head1 NAME

Net::LDAP::Entry - An LDAP entry object

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Net::LDAP;

  $ldap = Net::LDAP->new($host);
  $mesg = $ldap->search(@search_args);

  my $max = $mesg->count;
  for($i = 0 ; $i < $max ; $i++) {
    my $entry = $mesg->entry($i);
    foreach my $attr ($entry->attributes) {
      print join("\n ",$attr, $entry->get($attr)),"\n";
    }
  }

  # or

  use Net::LDAP::Entry;
  
  $entry = Net::LDAP::Entry->new;
  
  $entry->add(
    attr1 => 'value1',
    attr2 => [qw(value1 value2)]
  );
  
  $entry->delete( 'unwanted' );
  
  $entry->replace(
    attr1 => 'newvalue'
    attr2 => [qw(new values)]
  );
  
  $entry->update( $ldap ); # update directory server

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<Net::LDAP::Entry> object represents a single entry in the directory.
It is a container for attribute-value pairs.

A B<Net::LDAP::Entry> object can be used in two situations. The first and
probably most common use is in the result of a search to the directory
server.

The other is where a new object is created locally and then a single
command is sent to the directory server to add, modify or replace an
entry. Entries for this purpose can also be created by reading an
LDIF file with the L<Net::LDAP::LDIF|Net::LDAP::LDIF> module.

=head1 CONSTRUCTOR

=over 4

=item new

Create a new entry object with the changetype set to C<'add'>

=back

=head1 METHODS

=over 4

=item add ( ATTR => VALUE [, ATTR2 => VALUE2 ... ] )

Add one or more new attributes to the entry. Each value
must be a scalar variable or a reference to an array. The
values given will be added to the values which already exist
for the given attributes.

  $entry->add( 'sn' => 'Barr');

  $entry->add( 'street' => [ '1 some road','nowhere']);

B<NOTE>: these changes are local to the client and will not
appear on the directory server until the C<update> method
is called.

=item replace ( ATTR => VALUE [, ATTR2 => VALUE2 ... ] )

Similar to add, except that the values given will replace
any values that already exist for the given attributes.

B<NOTE>: these changes are local to the client and will not
appear on the directory server until the C<update> method
is called.

=item delete ( [ ATTR [, ATTR2 ... ]] )

Delete the given attributes from the entry. If no attributes
are passed then the next call to update will cause the entry
to be deleted from the server.

B<NOTE>: these changes are local to the client and will not
appear on the directory server until the C<update> method
is called.

=item dn ( [ DN ] )

Set or get the DN for the entry. With no arguments C<dn> will return
the current DN. If an argument is given then it will change the DN
for the entry and return the previous value.

B<NOTE>: these changes are local to the client and will not
appear on the directory server until the C<update> method
is called.

=item update ( [ CLIENT ] )

Update the directory server with any changes that have been made
locally. This means any calls that have been made to add, replace
or delete since the last call to changetype or update was made.

CLIENT should be a C<Net::LDAP> object where the update
should be sent to.

CLIENT is only optional is the B<Net::LDAP::Entry> object was created
by a search on a directory server. In which case, if omitted, the
update will be sent back to the same server.

The result will be an object of type L<Net::LDAP::Message|Net::LDAP::Message> as returned
by the add, modify or delete method called on CLIENT.

=item attributes ( [ OPTIONS ] )

Return a list of attributes that this entry has.

OPTIONS is a list of name/value pairs, valid options are :-

=over 4

=item nooptions

If TRUE, return a list of the attribute names excluding any options. For example for the entry

  name: Graham Barr
  name;en-us: Bob
  jpeg;binary: **binary data**

the return list would be C<( 'name', 'jpeg' )>.

=back

=item get ( ATTR [, OPTIONS ] )

Get the values for the attribute ATTR. The result will be a reference
to an array, if that attribute exists. If the attribute does not exist
the C<undef> will be returned.

OPTIONS is a list of name/value pairs, valid options are :-

=over 4

=item alloptions

If TRUE then the result will be a hash reference. The keys of the hash
will be the options and the hash value will be the values for those attributes.
For example if an entry had

  name: Graham Barr
  name;en-us: Bob

Then a get for attribute "name" with alloptions set would return 

  {
    ''       => [ 'Graham Barr' ],
    ';en-us' => [ 'Bob' ]
  }

=back

B<NOTE>: In the interest of performance the array references returned by C<get>
are references to structures held inside the entry object. These values
should B<not> be modified directly.

=item changetype ( [ TYPE ] )

If called without arguments it returns the type of operation that would
be performed when the update method is called. If called with an argument
it will set the changetype to TYPE.

Possible values for TYPE are

=over 4

=item add

The update method will call the add method on the client object, which
will result in the entry being added to the directory server.

=item delete

The update method will call the delete method on the client object, which
will result in the entry being removed from the directory server.

=item modify

The update method will call the modify method on the client object, which
will result in any changes that have been made locally being made to the
entry on the directory server.

=back

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Net::LDAP|Net::LDAP>,
L<Net::LDAP::LDIF|Net::LDAP::LDIF>

=head1 AUTHOR

Graham Barr <gbarr@pobox.com>.

Please report any bugs, or post any suggestions, to the perl-ldap mailing list
<perl-ldap-dev@lists.sourceforge.net>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1997-2000 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program is
free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same
terms as Perl itself.

=for html <hr>

I<$Id: Entry.pod,v 1.3 2000/07/30 21:03:50 gbarr Exp $>

=cut
